# 2.0

## Major reviews can now count as much as a major yearly accomplishment.

Originally, all major reviews counted as tech transfers, regardless of the
quality or impact of the release.  Major reviews can now count up to the
equivalent of a major accomplishment, similar to have an article published in
a high-impact peer-reviewed journal.  Supervisors are not required to do this
though; they may choose to count the impact as less, depending on the value of
the impact.

## Expanded explanation of how to write abstracts and provided three examples.

## Replaced VERSION.txt with a link to the code.gov code.json schema.

code.gov has developed a JSON schema for documenting projects.  They require
all projects to use this schema so that their automated tools can find and
document changes to projects as they happen.  This is a breaking change from
the 1.x version of this policy, and is a reason why the policy number was
incremented to 2.0.

## Clarified licensing so that both CC0 and an OSI-approved license may be used at the same time.

Whether or not a work has copyright attached depends on it source; works
created by Government employees in the course of their official duties
generally do not have copyright attached, while works by private citizens do.
Instead of forcing all projects to use CC0 exclusively for their work, the new
guidelines are to choose an OSI-approved Open Source license that is also
approved by the ARL Chief Conusel's office to accept all copyrighted
contributions under.  A notice is given in the project stating that those
portions of the work that have copyright attached are licensed under the
OSI-approved license, and those portions of the work that do not have
copyright attached are licensed under the CC0 license.  Consumers of the
project can use the standard tools provided the project's version control
system to determine which portions of the project have copyright attached and
which don't.

This is a breaking change and is one of the reasons why the version number was
bumped to 2.0.0

## Better explanation about trademarks and other IP issues

## Reordering of some sections to reflect how the policy is actually being used.

## Numerous spelling, grammar, and word choice fixes.

# 1.0

Initial release.
