# Glossary

<a name="78FA5278C17C11E6B899003EE1B763F8"></a>**AR. 380-10** The U.S. Army
regulation that governs how Army software can be released to the public.

<a name="79AF033AC17C11E6911F003EE1B763F8"></a>**AR. 5-11** The U.S. Army
regulation that governs how Army models and simulations may be released to the
public.

<a name="7B2AB4D2C17C11E6AC39003EE1B763F8"></a>**U.S. Army Research Laboratory
(ARL)** The nation's premier research laboratory for land forces.

<a name="7DB7D1E6C17C11E6AF24003EE1B763F8"></a>**ARL Form 1** The form and the
process used by ARL for OPSEC review of all publications, including software.

<a name="7FFF62C0C17C11E68EE2003EE1B763F8"></a>**ARL-M-5-2** The memorandum
that governs which models and simulations may be released outside of ARL.

<a name="80BB5F0AC17C11E6AF02003EE1B763F8"></a>**Cooperative Research and
Development Agreement (CRADA)** An agreement between a Government agency and a
private company or university to work together on research and development.

<a name="82768998C17C11E68A44003EE1B763F8"></a>**Contributor License Agreement
(CLA)** A legally binding contract that a contributor signs that describes the
rights being licensed and/or transferred with the work that a contributor is
giving.

<a name="836F8E9CC17C11E6910F003EE1B763F8"></a>**Creative Commons Zero (CC0)**
license. A license that, as far as is legally permitted in a jurisdiction,
places a work in the public domain.

<a name="84E523E4C17C11E6B04B003EE1B763F8"></a>**Department of Defense (DOD)**
The portion of the U.S. Government charged with national defense and security.

<a name="85B4B076C17C11E6A008003EE1B763F8"></a>**Document object identifier
(DOI)** A code used to uniquely identify an object.  On GitHub, these are used
to uniquely identify particular releases of software.

<a name="866BCDF6C17C11E69285003EE1B763F8"></a>**Export Administration
Regulations (EAR)** Regulations controlling the release of "dual use" items.
See https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/export-administration-regulations-ear
for more information.

<a name="8809AA14C17C11E691FC003EE1B763F8"></a>**Freedom of Information Action
(FOIA)** The law that governs which Government records MUST be made available
to the public.

<a name="88A5E64CC17C11E6859F003EE1B763F8"></a>**Government Furnished Property
(GFP)** Property owned by the Government that is provided to a contractor.

<a name="8A38C9DEC17C11E6A2B5003EE1B763F8"></a>**Government Furnished Software
(GFS)** Software owned by the Government that is provided to a contractor.

<a name="8CB9B558C17C11E6AC99003EE1B763F8"></a>**Invention Evaluation
Committee (IEC)** The committee at ARL charged with deciding if patent
protection should be pursued for an invention.

<a name="8D39E250C17C11E6BD62003EE1B763F8"></a>**Intellectual property (IP)**
Anything that can be trademarked, copyrighted, patented or treated as a trade
secret under U.S. law.

<a name="8DEFC60CC17C11E6A55D003EE1B763F8"></a>**International Traffic in Arms
Regulations (ITAR)** Regulations controlling the export and import of defense-
related articles and services on the United States Munitions List.  See
https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/regulations_laws/itar.html for more information.

<a name="8ECF3030C17C11E699E6003EE1B763F8"></a>**Operational security
(OPSEC)** Practices and procedures put in place to protect U.S. national
security interests.

<a name="8FB1C302C17C11E6A3E2003EE1B763F8"></a>**Public Affairs Office (PAO)**
The office at ARL responsible for presenting ARL to the public.

<a name="90A678DEC17C11E68CD0003EE1B763F8"></a>**Principal developer (PD)**
The developer or developers of a software package that is being proposed for
release under this process.  These developers have all contributed more than a
"de minimus" contribution to the project.  These may be ARL employees,
contractors, or external persons.

<a name="91933F1EC17C11E6AE5A003EE1B763F8"></a>**Point of contact (POC)** The
PD or PDs that serve as contacts for questions regarding the project.  In
general, all persons listed on the ARL Form 1 as authors will also be POCs for
the project.

<a name="BEA2CBDA037011E78D93003EE1B763F8"></a>**Release** A release is any
publication of code and related artifacts to an externally visible site such
as GitHub.  Publications to locations that are only accessible to cleared
personnel are not considered to be releases under this definition.
