# <a name="Legal_analysis"></a>Legal Analysis - Software Protection & Release Mechanisms

"Software," as that term is used herein, means computer programs, executables,
source code, and object code.  Software does not include computer databases or
software documentation.  Additionally, although design details, algorithms,
processes, flowcharts, formula, and related material that would enable a
particular piece of ARL software, or a functional equivalents thereof, to be
reproduced or created are not considered "Software", their premature release
may jeopardize IP protection and commercialization of software to which they
relate.

## <a name="6051891CC17C11E6A149003EE1B763F8"></a>Forms of Intellectual Property Protection for Software
### <a name="60BCFBCAC17C11E68506003EE1B763F8"></a>Patent

Software that meets the statutory or legal requirements may be patentable
under U.S. Patent Law.  In other words, the software must constitute a
patentable invention.  Once a patent application (provisional or non-
provisional) is on file with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, the
Government's rights in the invention are preserved although there is no
guarantee that a patent will ultimately be issued.

### <a name="61F31392C17C11E6A710003EE1B763F8"></a>Copyright

Software can be protected under U.S. Copyright Law as a literary work.
Copyright protection attaches as soon as the work is expressed in a tangible
medium of expression.  However, software created solely by civil servants as
part of their jobs is considered a U.S. Government work to which U.S.
copyright protection is not available.  There are different opinions on the
ability to assert foreign copyright even though the software is a U.S.
Government work.  In any case, the Government may obtain and hold copyright
transferred to it.  The copyright only protects the expression that the
software code takes and does not protect the underlining algorithms or
processes.  Algorithms and processes are best protected by attempting to
obtain a patent.  Due to the nature of software being both a literary work and
invention it can be protected by both a copyright and patent.

### <a name="635EE47EC17C11E68726003EE1B763F8"></a>Ability to Withhold Release to the Public ("like a trade secret")

In the private sector, software (usually the source code) can be protected as
a trade secret.  In the Government, it has been held that certain software is
not a "Government record" under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) that
would require its release.  Thus, the ability to withhold its release creates
a certain level of protection of the software.  Moreover, in accordance with
the authority in SEC. 801 of Public Law 113-66, software may be exempt from
disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United States Code, for a period of
five years after the development of the computer code.  Should a release be
contemplated, conditions could include nondisclosure and copyright like
restrictions based on contract principles.

### <a name="646A35C6C17C11E68746003EE1B763F8"></a>Trademark

Trademark protection is established through use in commerce on goods and
services.  Additional protection can be obtained through the federal
registration process.  The proper use of the name selected for a particular
piece of software as a trademark will go a long way to establishing
protection.

Whenever a new name is being coined for computer software it should be
referred to as "ARL Trademark" as opposed to just "Trademark." For example,
just as Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel refer to Microsoft's word
processing and spreadsheet software, respectively, ARL would benefit by having
its corporate name preceding newly coined software.  This is especially
important for software ARL plans to publicly distribute.  The ARL is already a
federally registered trademark that works as our "house brand."

Always use a Trademark as a proper adjective together with the generic name of
the product.  The Trademark (adjective) modifies the generic term (noun).  To
avoid a Trademark from becoming generic never use a Trademark as a common noun
or by using a plural form (adding s) or a possessive form (adding s).  Never
use a Trademark as a verb.  Example:  to the extent "xerox" is used as a verb
(to copy something), it lessens the value of the term as a Trademark.  Use of
"Brand" following a Trademark is especially helpful to combat generic
tendencies.  For example, repeated reference to SCOTCH tape as SCOTCH Brand
cellophane tape (or SCOTCH cellophane tape) helps remind consumers that SCOTCH
is a Brand name for tape from a single source, i.e., the 3M Company.  In
contrast, repeated reference to just SCOTCH tape, without following it with
the word Brand or cellophane, may ultimately lead consumers to think SCOTCH is
a generic term for cellophane tapes from any source.

## <a name="65F7096EC17C11E6AC27003EE1B763F8"></a>Intellectual Property Assessment

The software needs to be reported to the IP Law Branch.  The IP Law Branch
will make an IP assessment to determine ARL's rights and ability to release
the software.

## <a name="66F9D134C17C11E6A580003EE1B763F8"></a>OPSEC Review

All projects proposed for release must undergo an OPSEC review by undergoing
the ARL Form 1 process. OPSEC is a process used to identify and deny critical
information (specific information about capabilities and/or intentions) from
adversaries who seek to exploit such information for their advantage and our
disadvantage.  The OPSEC process involves systems threat and vulnerability
analyses, risk assessment, and cost-effective countermeasure planning and
implementation.  Its results include improved understanding of the following:

* the specific items deemed critical to the mission,
* indicators of that information,
* countermeasures that protect this information from the adversary, and
* an analytical basis for these decisions, if the process is applied properly.

## <a name="6892C3E8C17C11E68023003EE1B763F8"></a>Patent Review

Recognize that it is the intent of the patent system to eventually disclose
the invention described in a non-provisional patent application to the public.
Unless a patent applicant specifically requests otherwise, the U.S. Patent &
Trademark Office will publish the patent application after 18 months.  Even if
an applicant has requested that the application not publish after 18 months,
any patent that ultimately issues will be publicly available.  Patent
applications filed on classified and other critically sensitive inventions
will be placed under secrecy orders.  Thus, each invention being considered
for patenting needs to have an OPSEC review and ARL Form 1 completed so that
ARL Legal knows whether or not details of the invention can be released to the
public.

## <a name="6AD56B10C17C11E683F3003EE1B763F8"></a>Types of Releases and Options

### <a name="6B496914C17C11E6ACB3003EE1B763F8"></a>Releases of Army Model and Simulation Software (MOA)

There is a specific Army regulation concerning the release of model and
simulation software (Army Regulation 5-11, Management of Army Models and
Simulations). The party requesting the software must have a valid requirement.
For release to other U.S. Government agencies, U.S. contractors, and federally
funded research and development centers (FFRDCs), the release approval
authority is the major Army command (MACOM) commander or agency head of the
organization, which is the model and simulation proponent of the requested
software.  Designation of release approval authority can be delegated to lower
levels as defined in Appendix B-2. (AR 5-11, 8-3, Release Approval Authority).
The ARL has a companion policy document ARL-M-5-2, Release of Models and
Simulations Outside ARL.

### <a name="6C9439C0C17C11E6980F003EE1B763F8"></a>Releases to Contractors

The preferred approach for providing Government-furnished property (GFP),
including Government-furnished software (GFS), to a company under a Government
contract is through the contract, either at the beginning of the effort or
through a contract modification.  In either case, a Contracting Officer with
the authority to bind the Government signs on behalf of the Government.  The
decision to provide GFS should be made only after careful consideration of all
relevant factors.  Providing software to a contractor through a separate
letter agreement from the technical organization having custody of the
software is not the best mechanism to use.  The technical person signing the
letter may not have the authority to transfer the software.  If a letter is
being used because the thought is that a contract modification is too
burdensome, then a "standard" contract mod to provide GFS could be created to
facilitate the process.

### <a name="6DAA9DE2C17C11E6BBAE003EE1B763F8"></a>Beta Test Agreement

Software has been released by ARL to companies that sometimes also happen to
be Government contractors for beta testing.  Issues include the following:

#### <a name="6E9013FEC17C11E6974C003EE1B763F8"></a>Voluntary Services vs. Gratuitous Services.

As long as the arrangement does not amount to acceptance of voluntary services
for which the beta testing party could file a claim but, instead, is
structured as "gratuitous services", where the individual agrees (often in
writing in advance) to perform the services and will not request payment, such
an arrangement would not be considered to violate the Anti-deficiency Act (31
U.S.C. 1342).

#### <a name="6FF83DFAC17C11E68524003EE1B763F8"></a>Under what authority can ARL provide software to a company for beta testing?

A sample Beta Test Agreement ARL has used in the past does not include a cite
to any authority.  One approach might be to enter into a no cost contract,
which would be signed by a contracting officer.  Again, there must be some
sort of value or consideration for the contractor as there would be no
exchange of money.

### <a name="7132007AC17C11E69669003EE1B763F8"></a>Patent Licenses

A patent license basically grants permission to a licensee to use the
invention without the fear of infringement.  Generally, patent licensees want
to use software covered by the patent in one of three ways: (1) the licensee
wants to sell a software program as a standalone commercial product, (2) the
licensee wants to integrate the software into one of its own existing
commercial products, or (3) the licensee wants to use the software for its own
internal purposes.  Thus, the scope of the license must be tailored to fit the
circumstance.  A patent application (provisional or non-provisional) should be
on file with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office before a license is entered
into.  The Director of ARL has authority to grant patent licenses under 15
U.S.C. 3710a.  Royalties negotiated and collected under a patent license are
shared with the inventors listed on the patent and any balance remaining may
be retained by the laboratory.

### <a name="7295417AC17C11E68225003EE1B763F8"></a>Copyright Licenses

A copyright license grants permission to a licensee to do one or more of the
following: (1) reproduce the work, (2) distribute the work, (3) prepare
derivative works, and (4) display or perform the work publicly.  Although
Government works (i.e., those created by civil servants under the scope of
their employment) are not protected by U.S. copyright, ARL may obtain
copyright on software through an assignment to the Government.  The Director
of ARL is the official delegated to license the laboratory's IP, which could
arguably include copyright assigned to the Government.  However, any royalties
collected under a copyright license are considered to fall under the
miscellaneous receipts statute and must be forwarded to the U.S. Treasury.

### <a name="7468CE1AC17C11E69123003EE1B763F8"></a>SEC 801 Licenses

SEC. 801 of the FY14 National Defense Authorization Act, Public Law 113-66,
provides new authority, and assigns responsibilities and procedures for DOD
licensing of computer software and related documentation developed at a DOD
Laboratory.  Royalties collected are to be shared with the software
developers. [Waiting for DOD implementation of policy and delegations.]

### <a name="7593E6EEC17C11E6AE2E003EE1B763F8"></a>Releases to CRADA Collaborators

Software may be provided as part of the Government's contribution to a CRADA
relationship.  If there is no patent or copyright protecting the software it
can be provided with "copyright like" restrictions.  However, these
contractual restrictions will only apply to the CRADA Collaborator.  Should
the software be released to others there is no way to prevent its use by third
parties.  If software is provided to a CRADA Collaborator, it appears that a
fee could be charged to reimburse the laboratory for its use by the CRADA
Collaborator.  Determining the amount to charge could be a challenge and, of
course, subject to negotiation.  The ARL is authorized to retain money
collected under a CRADA but is not authorized to share the money with civil
servants involved in the software's creation.  Note that any changes to the
software made by the CRADA partner may be protected by copyright.

Patent License in CRADA.  For preexisting inventions, a CRADA partner must
apply for a patent license just as any prospective licensee would be required
to.  The process must follow the Government's licensing regulations (see, 37
CFR Part 404). For ARL software-related inventions made under a CRADA, the
CRADA partner may be offered a patent license as part of the CRADA deal.  The
Government's licensing regulations do not apply to patent licenses on
inventions made under a CRADA.

Copyright License in CRADA.  The CRADA statute, 15 U.S.C. 3710a. (a)(2),
authorizes the Director to license "other intellectual property" (e.g., a
copyright) that "may be voluntarily assigned to the Government" if "other
authority" exists.  Again, we are unaware of any "other authority" that would
authorize the Director to license a copyright covering software under a CRADA.
Software could be arguably be provided to a CRADA partner with "copyright
like" contractual restrictions.
